Roadmap for may 2026 (#1294)
software-mansion/cairols: ROADMAP_05_2026.md

# CairoLS 05.2026

This document aims to serve as a place where high level information about upcoming, planned work for CairoLS lives.
It is basically a list of main features and tasks that are planned to be added in the next ~6 months.

The list is sorted from top to bottom according to the priority the given task has (first thing having the top priority,
ie being more likely to be done first). Size of the task is ranked `1-5`, where `1` is smallest and `5` biggest.

A more detailed breakdown can be found on the [Github board](https://github.com/orgs/software-mansion/projects/33/views/6),
typically in the `Todo` and `Backlog LS` columns.

## Q2 2026 + Q3 2026

### 1. Memory consumption optimizations

LS uses too much memory, causing slowdowns and crashes in larger workspaces.
The work involves researching ideas that can reduce memory usage and validating them through profiling and testing.

Size: 5

### 2. Scarb.toml support improvements

> Expand LS understanding of `Scarb.toml` files: reject unknown/extra keys with diagnostics,

Reviewer: This is done basically, PRs are up

add quick-fixes for common manifest issues, and improve hover quality for manifest fields.

Size: 4

### 3. Gas cost & tooling code lenses

Add code lenses for displaying gas cost per function (including L2 gas and Starknet syscalls from top-level snforge functions),
and add commands for running `cairo-profiler` and `cairo-coverage` directly from the editor.

Size: 4

> ### 4. Proc-macro & declarative macro improvements

Reviewer: Can you link issue # ?

Fix bugs in proc-macro-controlled code where LSP features (goto, references, hover) do not work correctly,
and add code lens support for declarative macros.

Size: 4

> ### 5. Fix LS not being killed after closing VS Code window

Reviewer 2: IMHO this can even be our top priority for now, especially with the memory consumption numbers.

Reviewer: this is hard because it's rarely reproducible, thus a lower risk than you'd expect

Author: Moved it to the 2nd place, but @Arcticae is right, hard to reproduce

Sometimes after closing all VS Code windows a hanging LS process remains with ever-growing memory usage.
The work involves researching the root cause and fixing the process lifecycle management.

Size: 2

### 6. Completions improvements

> Make completions smarter and more context-aware: suggest identifiers based on their kind,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make completions smarter and more context-aware: suggest symbols based on expected type,
```

> filter out already-imported items, propose only correct items for impl aliases,

Reviewer: > filter out already-imported items

isn't this done?
